PDF page 1
AAS 08-311
THE EVOLUTION OF DEEP SPACE NAVIGATION: 1989-1999 
Lincoln J. Wood* 
The exploration of the planets of the solar system using robotic vehicles has 
been underway since the early 1960s.  During this time the navigational 
capabilities employed have increased grea tly in accuracy, as required by the 
scientific objectives of the missions and as enabled by improvements in 
technology.  This paper is the second in a chronological sequence dealing with 
the evolution of deep space navigation.  The time interval covered extends from 
the 1989 launch of the Magellan spacecraft  to Venus through a multiplicity of 
planetary exploration activities in 1999.  The paper focuses on the observational 
techniques that have been used to obtain navigational information, propellant-
efficient means for modifying spacecraft trajectories, and the computational 
methods that have been employed, tracing their evolution through a dozen 
planetary missions. 
INTRODUCTION 
A previous paper has described the evolution of deep space navigation over the time interval 1962 to 
1989.
1  The missions covered ranged from the early Mariner missions to the inner planets to the Voyager 
mission to the outer planets.  The current paper extends the previous paper by one decade.  It covers the 
entirety of the Magellan, Mars Observer, Mars Pathfi nder, Mars Climate Orbiter, and Mars Polar Lander 
missions, as well as the portions of the Pioneer Venu s Orbiter, Galileo, Ulysses, Near Earth Asteroid 
Rendezvous, Mars Global Surveyor, Cassini, and Deep Space 1 missions that took place between 1989 and 
1999.  As in the previous paper, attention is limited to those missions that involved travel well in excess of 
1,500,000 km from the Earth and that were targeted to fly close to one or more distant natural bodies.  
Attention is focused primarily on planetary missions that were managed by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA). 
EXPLORATION OF THE TERRESTRIAL PLANETS 
Pioneer Venus Orbiter 
The majority of the Pioneer Venu s Orbiter mission took place before th e time period covered by this 
paper.
1  In 1992, the periapsis altitude of the spacecra ft’s highly elliptical orb it about Venus, on a multi-
year downward trend due to solar gravitational effects, was approaching the upper atmosphere of Venus.  
Enough on-board propellant remained to sustain the periapsis altitude high in the atmosphere (130-150 km) 
for a limited amount of time, enabling the collection of atmospheric data. 
Around this time, power limitations  on the aging spacecraft limited tr acking to a few short intervals 
spread around each 24-hour orbit, rather than nearly continuous coverage, as had been available early in the 
mission.  A tracking strategy of four short passes per orbit was tested starting in July 1992.  Three orbits of 
                                                           
* Program Manager, Guidance, Na vigation, and Control Section, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,  California Institute of Technology, Mai l 
Stop 301-150, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, California 91109.  Email: Lincoln.J.Wood@jpl.nasa.gov 
 1

PDF page 2
data were fit at a time to produce orbit solutions.  A sequence of periapsis-raising maneuvers was executed 
from 8 September into early October 1992, at which point the propellant had been depleted.  After a 
lowest-yet 128.5-km periapsis passage, with a resulting speed reduction due to atmospheric drag of 2 m/s, 
no radio signal was detected from the spacecraft.2  The spacecraft entered the atmosphere, never to emerge, 
some unknown number of orbits thereafter. 
Magellan 
X-Band Uplink.  An X-band uplink capability (at 7.2 GH z) was added to one 34-m antenna at each 
Deep Space Network (DSN) complex in 1990. 3  Although originally motivated principally by the 
possibility of conducting gravitational wave detectio n experiments, the increase in the uplink frequency 
from the previously standard S-band offered numerous other benefits, some of which are related to 
navigation.  For example, at the time of the Magellan mission, S-band and X-band Doppler data had 
expected measurement accuracies of 1.0 and 0.1 mm/s, respectively, for 60-s averaging times.4  In addition, 
X-band radio metric data are much less affected by plasma interactions than S-band data because of the 
inverse-square frequency dependence of these interactions.
1  An X-band uplink capability was put into 
operational use at a second subnet of DSN 34-m stations in 1997 (well after the end of the Magellan 
mission).3 
Interplanetary Phase.   The Magellan spacecraft was launched  on 4 May 1989 by the Space Shuttle 
Atlantis, using an Inertial Upper Stage.  Coherent up links and downlinks were available at both S- and X-
band frequencies during the interplanetary cruise toward Venus (with the X-band uplink first available for 
operational use at some point during cruise).  The cr uise and approach navigation were carried out using S-
band and X-band two-way coherent Doppler data and X-band delta-differential one-way range ( ΔDOR) 
data.
1  The X-up/X-down Doppler data were of high quality after some initial problems were resolved. 5  
The Magellan X-band high-rate telemetry subcarrier had harmonics that spanned a 30-MHz bandwidth – 
the spanned bandwidth being a major determinant of ΔDOR data accuracy.  The overall ΔDOR 
measurement accuracy was expected to be 0.8 ns (24 cm), resulting in an angular accuracy of about 40 nrad 
using the DSN’s intercontinental baselines.4  The spacecraft transponder did not include a ranging channel, 
so that ranging data were not available. 
The dynamical modeling of the Magellan cruise trajectory included the treatment of solar radiation 
pressure and reaction wheel momentum dump effects.  Solar radiation pressure effects were modeled by 
representing the spacecraft as a self-shadowing parabolic  antenna and several flat plates (with shadowing 
effects not included).  Di ffuse and specular reflectivity coeffici ents associated with each of these 
components were estimated as part of the orbit determination process.
4  The Magellan spacecraft was the 
first NASA planetary spacecraft to use reaction wh eels for attitude control.  The angular momentum 
accumulated in the reaction wheels was removed by executing thruster firings twice per day.  Each week a 
file describing the size and duration of each burn was supplied to the project’s navigation team by the 
spacecraft team.
4  The most accurate orbit determination so lutions were obtained by processing all 
available Doppler and Δ DOR data, with the X-band Doppler data deweighted relative to their inherent 
accuracy, to minimize the impact of modeling errors and allow the limited amount of ΔDOR data available 
to exert a greater influence on the orbit solution. 4  Three trajectory-correcti on maneuvers (TCMs) were 
executed en route to Venus.6 
Elliptical Orbit Mapping Phase.   The Magellan spacecraft reached Venus and was inserted into an 
elliptical orbit on 10 August 1990.  Magellan’s principa l scientific payload was a synthetic aperture radar 
(SAR), to map the surface of Venus.  The SAR im aging of the planetary su rface required an orbit 
inclination between 84 and 86 deg relative to the equator of Venus, an orbit period between 3.1 and 3.3 
hours, a periapsis altitude between 275 and 325 km, and a latitude of periapsis between 0 and 10 deg north.  
With no orbit trim maneuvers executed after Venus orbit insertion, the first mapping cycle of roughly 243 
days (one Venus rotation period), began on 15 September with an orbit inclination of 85.5 deg, an orbit 
period of 3.26 hours, a periapsis altitude of 295 km, and a latitude of periapsis of 9.7 deg north.
4,7  The 
achievement of these orbital characteristics subsequent  to orbit insertion was enabled by the navigational 
accuracy attained during cruise and on approach to Venus. 
 2

PDF page 3
The orbital period for the Magellan spacecraft was substantially shorter than  for NASA’s previous 
planetary orbiter missions.  This made it impractical to conduct orbit determination by processing single 
orbits of data, with periapsis data deleted, as had typically been done before. 1  For a substantial fraction of 
an hour during each orbit, around periapsis, Doppler data were not  available because radar data were being 
collected during that time using the high-gain antenna.  In addition, Doppler data could not be collected for 
15 minutes just after apoapsis, while reference stars were being scanned to calibrate the attitude control 
gyros. 
Both two-way and three-way Doppler data were potentially available for use.  Whereas the transmitting 
and receiving stations are the same with two-way data, the stations are different (and typically lie on 
different continents) in the case of  “three-way” data.  The differencing  of two-way and three-way Doppler 
data (referred to as differenced Doppler data) provides information about the spacecraft velocity component 
perpendicular to the line of sight to the spacecraft an d lying in the plane determined by the two tracking 
stations and the spacecraft. 
Plans had existed to use delta-differential one-way Doppler ( ΔDOD) data during the orbit phase of the 
mission.  ΔDOD data is analogous to ΔDOR data, involving the tracking of a spacecraft relative to a distant 
quasar from tracking stations on different continents,
1 but without the need to resolve ambiguities in 
spacecraft delay.  Like differenced Doppler data, it provides information about the spacecraft velocity 
component perpendicular to the line of sight to the spacecraft and lying in the plane determined by the two 
tracking stations and the spacecraft.  It is theoretically more accurate th an differenced Doppler data, due to 
a greater cancellation of common error sources.  Ho wever, it was found that interstation clock and 
frequency offsets could be calibrated to sufficient accuracy for the Magellan mission using Global 
Positioning System satellite signals.  Thus, mission operations could be simplified by eliminating the 
quasar observations inherent in ΔDOD data and relying on difference d Doppler data instead.  The recent 
improvements in station time and frequency standards and the migration from S-band to X-band had made 
the differenced Doppler data type, which had been understood conceptually for some time, of practical use 
in flight operations.  Tests of both differenced Doppler and ΔDOD were carried out in transit to Venus.
5 
Orbit determination accuracy requirements existed for radial, downtrack, and crosstrack position 
components, both in absolute terms and in orbit-to-orbit relative terms, with the latter requirements (0.15-
1.0 km) being considerably more stringent than th e former (0.3-14.0 km).  In addition there were 
downtrack and crosstrack orbit prediction accuracy requirements. 7  All of these requirements were 
motivated by various details of the SAR mapping process. 
Uncertainties in the gravity field of Venus were an important error source for orbit determination while 
in orbit about Venus.  Other dynamical effects that were modeled include atmospheric drag near periapsis, 
solar radiation pressure, and velocity changes due to reaction wheel desaturation thrustings.  The modeling 
of solar radiation pressure was improved substantially during cruise.  The angular momentum desaturations 
occurred every second orbit near apoapsis.  Spacecraft  position and velocity at an initial (or epoch) time 
and base density were the standard quantities estimated early in the mapping phase, with a local fifth 
degree and order (5x5) gravity field added later.
8 
Orbit determination solutions were carried out daily, using 12 orbits (39 hours) of data.  Thus, orbit 
solutions on successive days contained 15 hours of common data, to reduce the relative error between the 
daily orbit calculations.  The two-way Doppler data were deweighted relative to their inherent accuracy, to 
allow the differenced Doppler data to play a more signifi cant role in the orbit solu tion.  Either a face-on or 
edge-on geometry occurred every several months, and adversely affected orbit determination accuracy for 
about three weeks.
8  In face-on, edge-on, and normal, intermedia te geometries, the inclusion of differenced 
Doppler data produced more accurate orbits than the processing of two-way Doppler data alone. 
Orbit determination software, which in the past had resided on mainframe computers and 
minicomputers,1 was transported to high-performance work stations in the early 1990s.  Orbit 
determination for the Magellan mission was performed on a dedicated local network consisting of two 28.5 
MIPS Sun Microsystems SPARCstations, a Sun 3/260 and three Sun 3/60s running UNIX, with 4GB of on-
line hard-disk storage.8 
 3

PDF page 4
The spacecraft’s orbit plane relative to Venus was ro tated by 0.106 deg by a propulsive maneuver after 
the first mapping cycle, to allow the cycle-2 altimetry data to be interleaved with the cycle-1 altimetry 
swaths.9  Over the first three mapping cycles, 99% of the surface of Venus was mapped at least once by the 
SAR, with some regions mapped three times at different incidence angles.  A second antenna collected 
altimetry data over 98% of the su rface, in parallel with the SAR im aging.  It was experimentally 
determined that orbit determination accuracy could be improved significantly, after the fact, by the use of 
SAR landmark measurements.
10 
Periapsis was lowered to 181 km before the fourth data collection cycle, for the purpose of improving 
the gravity-field model.  The periapsis altitude remained  in a 175±6 km band throughout this cycle.  The 
collection of high-resolution gravity data was limited to a ±30-deg latitude band near periapsis, due to the 
elliptical orbit. 
Aerobraking Phase.  After four data-collection cycles in a 3. 3-hour orbit, an aerobraking maneuver, in 
which the spacecraft made repeated  passes through the uppermost Venusian atmosphere to reduce the 
orbital energy and bring the spacecr aft into a more circular orbit,  was performed from 25 May until 3 
August 1993, over the course of 730 orbits.
11  This aerobraking process reduced the apoapsis altitude from 
8467 km to 541 km.  To accomplish this orb it change, involving a total velocity change ( ΔV) of 1219 m/s, 
in the standard propulsive manner would have required an order of magnitude more propellant than was 
available.
12 
The aerobraking process consisted of three phases: walk -in, main, and endgame.  In the first of these, 
four propulsive maneuvers were executed over three days to gradually lower the periapsis altitude from 172 
km to the aerobraking altitude of 141 km.  During the main aerobraking phase, nine small propulsive 
maneuvers were executed to maintain the orbital periapsis in a time-varying, 2-km portion of a 134 to 141 
km range, such that excessive aerodynamic heating would be avoided, with the aerodynamic drag still 
sufficient to gradually lower the periapsis speed.  (It  was really dynamic pressure at periapsis that was 
carefully tracked, rather than altitude, since the density  at a given altitude can vary due to solar energy 
inputs, turbulence, and gravity waves.
13)  Six of these trim maneuvers served to raise periapsis, and three to 
lower it.  The velocity change imparted by each atmospheric pass was about 1.8 m/s.  In the endgame 
phase, five propulsive maneuvers were executed to ra ise the periapsis altitude to 197 km after the desired 
apoapsis altitude had been achieved. 
Various antenna pointing and geometric constraints limited the theoretical maximum amount of 
tracking data per orbit to 133 minutes during the main phase and 20 minutes during the endgame phase.  
Orbit solutions were computed twice per day, with  the estimated quantities in cluding spacecraft position 
and velocity at an epoch time, the harmonic coefficients for a local 8x8 gravity field, the base atmospheric 
density (at a reference altitude of 131 km) for each dr ag pass, and constant acceler ations of 600-s duration 
over each orbit to account fo r thruster firing activity for attitude maintenance while in the atmosphere.
11  It 
was particularly important to be able to predict accu rately the dynamic pressure and periapsis time for 
upcoming drag passes.  A corridor orbit trim maneuver was planned when an upcoming drag pass was 
expected to incur a dynamic pressure in excess of some limit, typically 0.35 N/m 2.  Accurate predictions of 
periapsis times were needed to put the spacecraft in  the correct attitude during  the drag pass to reduce 
attitude control thruster firing.  The orbit period at the end of aerobraking was 1.58 hours. 
Near-Circular Orbit Phase.   The next data collection cycle was used to acquire gravity information 
from the initially 541-km (apoapsis altitude) by 197-km  (periapsis altitude) orbit from 3 August 1993 until 
29 August 1994, producing high-resolution gravity data for about 95% of the planet.  Doppler data could 
not be collected continuously, because of the need to do star scans to update attitude knowledge, the need 
to point the high-gain antenna toward  the sun some of the time to put the rest of the spacecraft in shadow 
for thermal control, the need to desaturate the reac tion wheels, the time required to establish a two-way 
link, occultations of the spacecraft by Venus, occasi onal superior conjunction conditions, and the demand 
for the use of DSN tracking stations by other projects.
14  Periapsis altitude fluctuations over a data-
collection cycle were now considerably larger than in the earlier elliptical orbit, due to gravity field 
irregularities, necessitating occasional maneuvers to keep the peak dynamic pressure from becoming too 
large. 
 4

PDF page 5
In September 1994 a “windmill” experiment took place, in which the solar panels were tilted at an angle 
so that atmospheric drag put a torque on the spacecra ft, which was measured to give information about the 
atmospheric density at different altitudes.  The Magellan spacecraft began its final descent into the 
Venusian atmosphere on 11 October 1994.  On 12 October radio contact was lost, and the spacecraft 
presumably burned up in the atmosphere shortly thereafter. 
Mars Observer 
The Mars Observer spacecraft was launched on 25 September 1992.  It was the first spacecraft to 
communicate exclusively at X-band.  Three TCMs were  executed on the way to Mars.  A planned fourth 
TCM was not executed due to the orbit accuracy achieved with  the third TCM months earlier. 15  O r b i t  
determination solutions constructed using various combinations of Doppler, ranging, and ΔDOR data over 
various periods of time were found to be consistent throughout the mission.16 
Communication with the spacecraft was lost on 21 August 1993, three days before the planned insertion 
into orbit around Mars.  The most probable cause of the spacecraft failure was thought to be a rupture of the 
fuel pressurization tubing. 
Mars Global Surveyor 
Interplanetary Phase.   The Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) sp acecraft was launched on 7 November 
1996.  Three TCMs were executed on the way to Mars.  An additional TCM (the third in a planned 
sequence of four) was not executed.  The MGS spacecraft was inserted into  an elliptical orbit about Mars 
on 12 September 1997 by means of a 973-m/s maneuver.  The actual periapsis altitude of 262.9 km was 
within 12.9 km of the targeted altitude of 250 km.17 
Aerobraking Phases.  Whereas aerobraking was employed in the Magellan mission only after many of 
the scientific objectives had already been accomplished,  due to concerns about risk, this orbit modification 
approach was considered mature enou gh to be used upon arrival in the case of MGS, due to the successful 
Magellan demonstration.  However, structural problems with a solar panel wing 17,18 required a more 
gradual aerobraking schedule than had been planned, so as to put less pressure on the solar panels. 
Aerobraking was initiated with a sequence of six propu lsive maneuvers at apoapsis, gradually lowering 
the orbital periapsis into the Martian atmosphere. 19  Aerobraking operations were suspended on 12 
October, after an aerobraking pass with a dynamic pressure of 0.93 N/m 2, due to concerns about the 
damaged solar panel wing.  The aerobraking process was replanned, extended in time, divided into two 
phases, and resumed on 7 November, with average dynamic pressure levels reduced to 0.2 N/m 2 (and later 
revised upward somewhat).  During the first aerobraking phase, the orbital period was reduced from 45 
hours to 11.6 hours. 19,20  (It had already been reduced to slightly less than 35 hours at the time of the 
suspension and replanning of aerobraking.) 
After the termination of this first aerobraking phas e on 27 March 1998, the spacecraft entered a science 
phasing orbit.  This phasing orbit avoided the need to carry out aerobraking operations during a solar 
conjunction period and allowed the ascending node of the orbit to regress toward the local mean solar time 
desired for the eventual science mapping orbit.  A second phase of aerobraking was initiated on 23 
September.21,22  Three propulsive maneuvers were executed at apoapsis to gradually lower the orbital 
periapsis into the Martian atmosphere. 
Throughout the aerobraking process, the orbit was maintained such that the dynamic pressure at 
periapsis fell into a corridor bounded above to limit the force acting on the spacecraft’s damaged solar array 
yoke assembly (as well as thermal effects on the spacecr aft) and bounded below to ensure that the desired 
reduction in orbital period could be achieved by the scheduled end date for aerobraking (determined by the 
desired lighting conditions for the mapping phase).  Remaining within this dynamic pressure corridor was 
complicated by the fact that at mospheric variations of 70% (2σ ) occurred from orbit to orbit and the fact 
that uncertainties in the Martian gravity field could cause the periapsis altitude to shift unexpectedly.  
Parameters associated with an atmospheric density model were estimated at almost every periapsis passage, 
based on the analysis of two-way, and occasionally one-way, Doppler data.  For approximately one hour 
centered about periapsis passage, no Doppler data c ould be acquired, because the spacecraft orientation 
employed while passing through the upper Martian atmosphere was not consistent with pointing the high-
 5

PDF page 6
gain antenna toward Earth.  Thus, the effects of the Martian atmosphere were deduced by comparing 
Doppler-determined orbit solutions before and after periapsis passage.  Spacecraft accelerometer data 
recorded during the atmospheric passes were helpful in measuring atmospheric properties, particularly the 
density scale height.
23  It was necessary to be able to predict future periapsis passage times to 225-280 s, 
since the timing of the sp acecraft’s sequence of events during an  aerobraking pass was relative to the 
assumed periapsis passage time.  This prediction accuracy was achieved a sufficient number of orbits in 
advance to support the sequence generation process for periapsis passages. 
The second phase of aerobraking was terminated by a propulsive maneuver on 4 February 1999.  Over 
the course of the two aerobrakin g phases, the MGS spacecraft perfor med 891 drag passes, executed 92 
trajectory control maneuvers, survived  the onset of a Martian dust storm that tripled dynamic pressure at 
aerobraking altitudes, and underwent a reduction in spacec raft orbital period of mo re than 43 hours, while 
avoiding the propellant expenditure associated with a velocity change of nearly 1250 m/s that would have 
been needed for orbit modification without aerobraking.
21 
Mapping Orbit Phase.  From 4 February to 26 February, a gravity calibration period, with nearly 
continuous Doppler and ranging tracki ng coverage, was carried out.  On 19 February, the spacecraft was 
transferred into an initial mapping orbit by means of a propulsive maneuver.  Science mapping, with the 
Mars Orbiter Camera and other instrumentation, be gan on 9 March 1999, with the MGS spacecraft in a 
117-minute, nearly circular, nearly polar, frozen orbit with a mean altitude of 402 km. 24  (In a frozen orbit, 
the eccentricity and argument of periapsis are constraine d by the gravitational field structure to vary over 
narrow ranges with time.25)  The orbit was sun synchronous and crossed the Martian equator from south to 
north at 2 PM local mean solar time.  The orbit had a 7-day near-repeat cycle, allowing for the mapping of 
Mars in 26-day cycles. 
Major orbit determination challenges during the orbiting phase of this mission involved the modeling of 
the Martian gravity field and the autonomously commanded spacecraft angular momentum desaturations 
(AMDs).24  The Martian gravity field mode l was significantly improved in accuracy over the course of the 
mission through the analysis of MGS Doppler data.  AMD thruster firings affected the translational motion 
of the spacecraft, as well as unloading the angu lar momentum accumulated by the spacecraft’s three 
reaction wheels; occurred about three times per day; and were difficult to model. 
X-band Doppler data at 10-s interv als were collected over three to f our orbits for trajectory prediction 
(to avoid the occurrence of more than one AMD event in  the data span) and 17 to 22 orbits for trajectory 
reconstruction.24  An ultra-stable oscillator was availa ble on board for tracking and gravity field 
determination.  Consequently, one-way Doppler data were found to be usable for orbit determination, 
provided that two-way data were available to resolv e a 4.9-kHz bias in the one-way data.  The quantities 
estimated include the spacecraft position and velocity at  an epoch time, a subset of the gravitational field 
harmonic coefficients, velocity cha nges associated with AMD events dur ing the data span, and the ultra-
stable oscillator frequency bias and drift rate. 
Orbit reconstruction errors were typically less than 10 m, 200 m, and 3 m in radial, downtrack, and 
crosstrack directions.24  The results improved by a factor of three to ten during tracking data passes.  The 
accuracy was somewhat degraded when  the spacecraft orbit about Mars wa s close to edge-on, as viewed 
from the Earth. 
Orbit prediction errors twenty days into the future were typically less than 0.2 km, 70 km, and 0.04 km 
in radial, downtrack, and crosstrack directions. 24  The effects of future AMDs were modeled by constant 
acceleration components, derived from recent AMD be havior.  An accurate gravity field, MGS75C, 26 
developed during the mission, was needed to allow proper treatment of AMD effects. 
Mars Pathfinder 
Interplanetary Phase.   The Mars Pathfinder (MPF) spacecraft was launched on 4 December 1996.  
Communications were at X-band.  The circular polarization of the radio signals and an offset of the 
spacecraft’s antenna boresight from the spin axis of the rotating sp acecraft caused both a bias and a 
sinusoidal modulation to appear in the Doppler data. 
 6

PDF page 7
The noise level of ranging data was required to be no more than 1m (1σ).  This requirement was not met 
during much of the interplanetary flight; but the data that were most important, taken during the last 35 
days, had a noise level of 0.57 m (1 σ).27  In previous planetary missions, range data had typically been 
weighted more loosely than the noise level would imply, due to various measurement and dynamical error 
sources that had been difficult to model accurately.  (To a lesser degree, the same approach had been taken 
with Doppler data at times.)  In the Mars Pathfinder mission, the approach was taken to weight range data 
near their inherent accuracy level, while using more  sophisticated models to represent measurement and 
dynamical errors that might be important.
28,29 
The quantities estimated in generating orbit determ ination solutions include d spacecraft position and 
velocity at an epoch time, solar radiation pressure parameters, velocity changes from TCMs and attitude 
control events, DSN station locations, Earth and Mars ephemerides (near encounter), a range bias due to 
spacecraft hardware delay, range biases for each DSN s ite, and a Doppler bias.  In addition, a number of 
stochastic parameters were estimated.  These stocha stic parameters included pass-dependent biases for 
range and Doppler data, tropospheric and ionospheric transmission effects on the radio signal, Earth 
rotation and polar motion parameters, and miscellaneous  nongravitational accelerations experienced by the 
spacecraft.
27  In previous planetary missions, effects that had been thought to be difficult to model had been 
treated as “considered” parameters – parameters that are not estimated, but with uncertainties that affect the 
error covariance associated with the estimated parameters.  Considered parameters were not included in the 
Mars Pathfinder orbit determination solutions, due to the effort made to model and estimate all significant 
effects. 
The flight path angle at entry to the Martian atmosphere was required to be -14.2±1.0 deg, to ensure a 
safe descent to the surface. 27  Four TCMs were executed en route to Mars to achieve the desired delivery 
accuracy.  The first two had biased aimpoints due to planetary contamination issues.  The third TCM was 
not quite sufficient to achieve the desired entry cond itions.  The fourth TCM was executed 9 days before 
arrival at Mars.  Orbit determination accuracies did not improve significantly after the fourth TCM until the 
last 48 hours before entry, as the gravitational attraction of Mars began to appear in the Doppler data at 
levels greater than noise.  These improved flight path estimates were used to update key parameters in the 
flight software; to update trajectory predictions used by the DSN to maintain contact with the spacecraft for 
as long as possible during the descent; and to allow for the possibility of a fifth TCM either 10.5 or 5.5 hr 
before entry, should it be necessary.  This fifth TCM was not executed.  The achieved entry flight path 
angle was -14.06 deg.
27,30 
Entry, Descent, and Landing.   On 4 July 1997, the MPF spacecraft entered the Martian atmosphere at 
an air-relative speed of 7.48 km/s.  Whereas the Viking landers had entered the Martian atmosphere from 
orbit, the MPF spacecraft entered the at mosphere directly, at a considerab ly higher speed.  In addition, 
whereas the Viking landers were designed to achieve lift as well as drag, the MPF spacecraft maintained an 
angle of attack near zero by virtue of its aerodynamically stable design and by spinning at 2 rpm.  The 
entry, descent, and landing (EDL) process was executed autonomously, but was subject to various 
parameter values that were updated on board prior to entry.  The cruise stage was jettisoned 30 min before 
entry interface (defined to occur at a radius of 3522.2 km), marking the formal beginning of EDL. 
The aeroshell protecting the lander expe rienced a maximum deceleration of 16 g 78 s after entry 
interface (EI).  The parachute began to unfurl 171 s afte r EI, at an altitude of 9 km and a speed of 375 m/s 
(Mach 1.8).  The on-board decision to deploy the parachute was triggered by starting a timer when the 
accelerometer-sensed aerodynamic deceleration reached 5 g.  The sensed deceleration 12 s after the start of 
the timer was used as an indexing parameter to select the proper time for parachute deployment from a 
stored functional relationship, which had been determined in advance from extensive simulations.  There 
was a desire to deploy the parachute at a dynamic pressure of about 600 N/m
2 (and a Mach number 
between 1.7 and 2.3).  The trigge ring scheme was intended to accomp lish this, using the available 
measurement information.  In the ev ent that this scheme appeared to be malfunctioning, a backup scheme 
was available, which would have initiated parachute deployment at a fixed time stored on board.  The 
detailed parameter values associated with the timing of parachute deployment were updated 35 hours 
before entry, based on the latest available trajectory and atmospheric information.  Opportunities for later 
updates existed, but changes in parameter values were not needed.
31 
 7

PDF page 8
Release of the forebody heatshield and extension of a bridle occurred 21 and 40 s after the initiation of 
parachute deployment.  After the spacecraft had travel ed down the bridle, the radar altimeter initiated the 
search for the Martian surface, at an altitude of about 1.6 km and a speed of 60-75 m/s.  These altimetry 
data were used to infer the descent rate and determin e the appropriate time of ai rbag inflation (295 s past 
EI) and solid-rocket ignition (299 s past EI, at an altitude of 88 m).  After the solid-rocket motors had 
removed the remaining vertical velocity, the bridle connecting the lander and the backshell was cut, 21 m 
above the surface, and the spacecraft fell to a first surface impact at 305 s past EI. 30,31  The spacecraft 
bounced more than 15 times before coming to a stop.  The Sojourner microrover, stowed within the lander, 
rolled onto the surface on 5 July. 
Extensive numerical simulations of the EDL process were carried out in advance, using three- and six-
degree of freedom dynamical modeling software.  Efforts were made to improve the modeling of the 
Martian atmosphere using Hubble Space Telescope and Earth-based microwave measurements.  An 
aerodynamic model of the vehicle was developed from computational fluid dynamic calculations and 
existing wind-tunnel and ballistic-range data.
31 
Landing was required to occur within a 100 km x 20 0 km elliptical footprin t on the surface.  The 
landing took place 27 km from the intended target landing site. 31  The knowledge of the spacecraft’s 
trajectory upon entry was sufficiently accurate that atmospheric flight dispersions, due to aerodynamic and 
atmospheric uncertainties, were sign ificant contributors to the landing error.  Based on the successful 
approach navigation of the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft using the orbit determination filter configuration and 
the tight weighting of Doppler and range data described above, it was argued that future Mars missions 
should be navigated using only Doppler and range data, without the addition of optical or ΔDOR data.27 
Mars Climate Orbiter 
The Mars Climate Orbiter (MCO) spacecraft was laun ched on 11 December 1998.  During the nine-
month journey from Earth to Mars, thrusters were peri odically fired to remove angular momentum buildup 
in the on-board reaction wheels.  Preflight analysis had indicated that momentum unloading events would 
occur approximately once every seven days during cruise. 32  These angular momentum desaturation 
(AMD) events occurred much more frequently than this  (10-20 times per week) and more frequently than 
in the case of the MGS sp acecraft, because the MCO solar array wa s asymmetrical with respect to the 
spacecraft body, unlike the MGS spacecraft.  This center of pressure/center of mass offset produced torques 
that resulted in significant accumula tions of angular momentum in the MCO spacecraft’s reaction wheels.  
A daily 180-deg reorientation of the spacecraft, which would have caused the solar pressure torque and the 
resulting angular momentum buildup and AMD thrusting effects to largely cancel  over time, had been 
planned.  These daily rotations were ultimately deleted from the spacecraft operations plan, however.33 
Information on AMD events that was supplied to the navigation team by means of computer files 
represented these events in lbf-s, whereas the softwa re interface specification called for the use of N-s.  
Thus, the effect of the AMD events wa s understated by a factor of 4.45.  These files were not available for 
use by the navigation team until well into the flight.  Since the AMD effects were mostly perpendicular to 
the Earth-spacecraft line of sight, the full extent of AMD mismodeling was not readily apparent in the 
Doppler data.  Some degree of inaccuracy was apparent, however; and, with the problem reported but never 
fully resolved, the AMD data were assigned relatively large error standard deviations in the orbit 
determination process.  These error standard deviations were small compared to the actual, yet unknown, 
errors, though.  The variation in the capture orbit periapsis altitude was required to be no more than ±20 
km, with 99% probability.  Preflight  analysis had indicated that accurate modeling of the angular 
momentum desaturation maneuvers would be important in meeting this requirement, even at the originally 
expected rate of once per week.
32 
As the spacecraft approached Mars, orbit determina tion was carried out by processing Doppler data 
only, range data only, and both Doppler and range data, with the results of the three strategies compared for 
consistency.  The Doppler-only solutions consistently indicated a closer approach  to the planet than the 
other two solutions, with range-only solutions indicating a more distant approach.  Four TCMs were 
executed on the way to Mars, with the fourth of these, executed on 15 September (and based on an 8 
September orbit solution), targeting the periapsis altitude shortly after the Mars Orbit Insertion (MOI) burn 
 8

PDF page 9
to be 226 km.  Over the week after TCM-4, the pred icted periapsis altitude decreased to the range of 150-
170 km.  A contingency plan for a fifth TCM was in  place during the approach to Mars.  Such a TCM 
could have been used as to raise the initial periapsis altitude.  There were concerns regarding the risk and 
potential compromises to future mission performance associated with executing such a maneuver, however; 
and a fifth TCM was not attempted.  With Mars exerting a significant grav itational attraction on the 
spacecraft over the last 24 hours before arrival, increasingly accurate orbit solutions were obtained, with the 
predicted periapsis altitude dropping to about 110 km about an hour before the MOI burn.33 
The spacecraft executed the MOI burn on 23 September 1999.  The spacecraft was to have entered a 13-
14 hour orbit as a result of the MOI burn and then used aerobraking for several weeks to achieve a low-
altitude, near-circular, near-polar orbit about Mars, for a two-year study of the Martian atmosphere and 
surface.  The burn was observed in  telemetry data for four minutes, until the spacecraft was occulted by 
Mars, 49 seconds earlier than predicted.  A signal  from the spacecraft was not reacquired after the 21-
minute expected occultation interval .  Once the error in the AMD data  had been fully diagnosed and 
estimates of the spacecraft’s trajectory recalculated using all ava ilable tracking data and corrected AMD 
data, it was determined that the initial periapsis altit ude (with atmospheric effects ignored, for simplicity) 
would have been 57 km.  A “vacuum” periapsis altitude of at least 80 km would have been needed to allow 
the spacecraft to survive a passage through the upper atmosphere.33 
This incident was an unfortunate demonstration of the fact that orbit determination solutions based 
solely on line-of-sight radio metric data can be inaccurate if the forces acti ng on a spacecraft are modeled 
incorrectly.  Some spacecraft position and velocity components are only weakly observable with line-of-
sight data.  Highly accurate dynami cal and observable mode ling allows these components to be inferred 
after the processing of sufficient data.  The interplane tary portion of the Mars Pathfinder mission had been 
navigated very well using just line-of-sight radio metric data, in conjunction with good modeling.  
However, the reliance on single-vehicle DSN tracking to support planetary orbit insertion, in the context of 
MCO, was judged, after the fact, to have involved considerable systems risk, due to the possible 
accumulation of unobserved perturbatio ns to the long interplanetary trajectory.  The development and 
deployment of alternative navigational schemes were recommended.34 
Mars Polar Lander 
Interplanetary Phase.   The Mars Polar Lander spacecraft wa s launched on 3 Ja nuary 1999.  The 
spacecraft was three-axis stab ilized, with attitude control performed us ing thrusters.  Spacecraft attitude 
control was made complex because of the need to point the medium-gain antenn a toward the Earth, the 
solar array toward the sun, and the star cameras in a direction such that they could update the on-board 
attitude estimate.  In general, it was not possible to  perform these three functions from the same spacecraft 
orientation.  Thus, many spacecraft reorientations were needed during the mission to accomplish these 
three essential tasks.  Information about all thruster firings for attitude control was included in spacecraft 
telemetry data, either individually or in terms of sh ort-term average or accumula ted effects.  The attitude 
control activity was a major determining factor for the delivery accuracy at Mars.  The solar pressure model 
consisted of four flat plates and a cylinder, with specular and diffuse reflection coefficients for each.35 
The main tracking data types used during cruise were two-way Doppler and range data.  Constraints on 
solid-state power amplifier temperat ure and power availability limited tr acking intervals to four hours, 
followed by five hours of no tracking.  Special efforts were made with both ground and on-board 
telecommunications equipment to obtain ranging data with a 1-m noise level.  Late in the cruise, some 
three-way Doppler data were collected, so as to generate differenced Doppler data.  During the last 30 days 
of cruise, near simultaneous tracking (NST) data, using the MGS spacecraft as a reference, were collected.  
By combining tracking data and estimating the trajectories of both spacecraft simultaneously, the effects of 
error sources common to both spacecraft were reduced, allowing a more accurate estimation of the lander’s 
trajectory relative to Mars than could be achieved with lander tracking data alone.  The selection of 
estimated parameters for orbit determination solutions  was roughly the same as for the Mars Pathfinder 
mission.  No Doppler bias was needed since the spacecra ft was not spinning.  A nu mber of standard filter 
cases were routinely run, with di fferenced Doppler and NST data incl uded in some cases, but not others, 
for example.35 
 9

PDF page 10
Four TCMs had been executed on approach to Mars, along with a landing site adjustment maneuver, as 
of two days before arrival.  The flight path angle at entry to the Martian atmosphere (again defined to occur 
at a radius of 3522.2 km) was required to be -13.25±0.54 deg with 95% probability, to ensure a safe landing 
in the designated target area.  Landing was to occur at a latitude of roughly -75 deg.  The question remained 
as to whether to execute a fifth TCM 6.5 hr before encounter.  A suite of 10 possible TCMs was designed 
to vary the entry flight path angle in discrete steps, while keeping other entry parameters constant, should a 
TCM turn out to be necessary, based on future orbit determination solutions.  It was ultimately decided to 
execute the TCM that would decrease the flight path angle by the minimum designed amount.  The 
spacecraft reached Mars on 3 December 1999, entering th e atmosphere at a speed of 6.9 km/s.  The actual 
flight path angle was in error by 0.15 deg.  The late orbit determination solutions drifted somewhat in the 
B-plane direction that was not being controlled by the fifth TCM; however, the expected landing site was 
within the target zone on the Martian surface.  (The B-plane is centered on the planet and perpendicular to 
the spacecraft-planet relative velocity vector on approach, before the flig ht path has been affected by the 
planet’s gravity.
1) 
Entry, Descent, and Landing.   Upon arrival at Mars the spacecraf t was to orient itself in the entry 
attitude and then jettison the cruise stage.  Decel eration to an acceptable t ouchdown speed was to be 
accomplished by a combination of an aeroshell, a para chute, and thrusters.  The parachute was to be 
deployed as the vehicle approached Mach 2, as calcu lated by the on-board inertial measurement unit, with 
the heatshield jettisoned after the parachute deployment transients had dissipated.  As the lander neared the 
surface, a short-range Doppler radar was to acquire th e surface.  After the parachute had been jettisoned, a 
set of 12 pulse-mode hydrazine engines was to slow the vehicle for final touchdown on the Martian 
surface.36 
After the planned communication outage during atmos pheric entry and descent to the surface of Mars, 
contact with the spacecraft was never reestablished.  Th e most probable cause of failure was the generation 
of spurious signals when the lander legs were deployed during descent.  These signals would have falsely 
indicated that the lander had landed, resulting in a premature shutdown of the engines and a subsequent 
crash landing.  An after-the-fact anal ysis determined that the Mars ’98 project, consisting of the MCO and 
MPL missions, was significantly underfunded from the start, for the established performance 
requirements.37 
EXPLORATION OF THE OUTER PLANETS 
Galileo 
The Galileo spacecraft consisted of two vehicles: a Jup iter orbiter and an atmospheric probe, the first 
instance of each type of vehicle to explore an out er planet.  The Galileo spacecraft was launched on 18 
October 1989, carried into Earth orbit in the cargo bay of Space Shuttle Atlantis.  It was then propelled onto 
its interplanetary flight path by an Inertial Upper Stage.  Although earlier plans had called for Galileo to use 
a more powerful upper stage so that it could fly directly to Jupiter, the final flight path took it by other 
planets first so that it could gain energy from their gravity fields.38 
Venus and Earth-1 Flybys.  The Galileo spacecraft flew past Venus on 10 February 1990 at an altitude 
of 16,000 km and then past Earth on 8 December 1990 at 960-km altitude.  Orbit determination solutions 
were obtained by processing S-band Doppler, range, and ΔDOR data.  Because the S-band transmissions 
were circularly polarized and the S- band antennas were mounted on the spinning portion of the spacecraft, 
a bias proportional to the spin rate (nominally 3.15  rpm) was present in the Doppler data and required 
modeling.  In addition, one of the S-band antennas was offset from the spacecraft’s spin axis, producing a 
sinusoidal fluctuation in the Doppler signal, which had to be modeled.39 
A flat-plate model, with specular and diffuse reflectivity coefficients, was used to model solar radiation 
pressure effects on the spacecraft’s motion.  Trajectory-correction maneuvers could be performed most 
efficiently by rotating the spacecraft to the desired maneuver orientation, executing the maneuver, and then 
rotating the spacecraft back to its original orientation (turn-and-burn mode).  They could also be performed 
less efficiently, but more simply, by firing some co mbination of thrusters with out rotating the spacecraft 
(vector mode).  To avoid potential thruster overheatin g, the thrusters were fired in pulses, rather than 
 10

PDF page 11
continuously.40  To prevent the clogging of retro-propulsion module passages, the thrusters were briefly 
fired every few weeks to flush old propellant from the system.  This resulted in small velocity changes 
periodically, which were estimated as part of the orbit determination process.  It was necessary to reorient 
the spacecraft from time to time (every two or thre e days to once per month, depending on heliocentric 
distance) to keep the spin axis pointed toward the sun.  It was intended that these attitude changes would be 
performed by balanced thruster firings that would produce a torque, but no net translational force.  
However, there were net velocity changes resulting from these attitude updates, which needed to be 
modeled.
39 
Estimated parameters included spacecraft position and velocity at an epoch time, solar pressure 
reflectivity coefficients, and ΔV events occurring during the data span.39  Two TCMs were executed on the 
way to Venus, with a third planned TCM cancelled as unnecessary.  The spacecraft passed about 9 km from 
the B-plane target point, even with no TCMs executed during the last month and a half before the Venus 
flyby.
39,41 
Between Venus and the Earth, six TCMs were executed. 39  The first two were deterministic maneuvers 
needed to reach the vicinity of the Earth.  The first four were biased away from the desired Earth-relative 
aimpoint to maintain the prob ability of the spacecraft’s entering the Earth’s atmosphere below 10 -6.  The 
first usage of S-band ΔDOR data in this mission took place during th e three months before the Earth flyby, 
with a data accuracy of 1.67 ns (50 cm) of delay, equivalent to an angular accuracy of about 80 nrad using 
the DSN’s intercontinental baselines.  The most accurate orbit determination solutions made use of all three 
available radio metric data types.  The spacecraft passed the Earth about 9 km from the B-plane aimpoint 
for the final TCM,
39,41 adding 5.2 km/s to the spacecraft’s heliocentric speed in the process. 
Gaspra Flyby and Optical Navigation.   Between the first and second Earth flybys, the Galileo 
spacecraft flew close to the main-belt asteroid 951 Gaspra on 29 October 1991, at a distance of about 1,600 
km, the first such visit by any spacecraft.  Achieving a successful flyby of Gaspra  required a campaign of 
ground-based astronomical observations to improve its ephemeris and the development of high-accuracy 
star catalogs for the region of space behind Gaspra .  The ground-based observational campaign, which 
included many observations during Gaspra’s oppositions of 1989-90 and 1991, improved the ephemeris 
errors by roughly a factor of three.  High-accuracy star catalogs were constructed for those portions of the 
celestial sphere near the track of Gaspra as seen from Earth during these two oppositions. 42,43  The same 
was done for the track as seen from the spacecraft during the final two m onths before encounter, to allow 
accurate optical navigation1,44 to be performed over at least a portion of this time. 
The optical navigation software evolved through a number of languages over the years and was hosted 
on a variety of computers.  Before operational use in the Galileo mission, the Optical Navigation Image 
Processing System (ONIPS), for picture display and image centerfinding, was rewritten in SFTRAN.  The 
Optical Navigation Program set (ONP), for scene prediction, generation of residuals and partial derivatives, 
and filtering, was rewritten in FORTRAN 77.  The software was hosted on Digital Equipment Corporation 
VAX minicomputers.
44 
The Galileo imaging system had a focal length of 1500 mm, as in the case of the Voyager narrow-angle 
camera.  Unlike the Voyager camera, however, the Ga lileo imaging system had a charge-coupled device 
(CCD) light-sensing element, rather than a vidicon sensor.  CCDs, with greater geometric fidelity than 
vidicons, produce much better astrometry.  Well exposed images of stars or unresolved solar system objects 
(in Galileo and subsequent missions) often have rms residuals of less than 0.05 picture elements (pixels) 
with a CCD photodetector.  The prior vidicon systems rarely performed better than 0.25 pixels. 44  Each 
picture element in the Galileo 800x800 CCD array subtended an angle of 10 μrad.45 
It was on the way to Gaspra that the spacecraft’ s high-gain antenna was to be deployed, allowing 
subsequent communication at X-band, with much higher data rates and improved radio metric accuracy.  
The failure of the high-gain antenna to deploy in April 1991 had many implications – among them a severe 
limitation on the number of optical navigation images that could be transmitted to Earth prior to the Gaspra 
flyby, because of the drastically reduced data rates that were available using the low-gain antennas. 
Four imaging frames were returned, in single-frame mosaic mode, with the images of Gaspra and 
background stars appearing as irregular streaks, due  to the combination of deliberate and unintended 
 11

PDF page 12
motions of the scan platform while the shutter was held open for an extended time. 42,44,45  Each such 
imaging frame contained the information equivalent of multiple conventional optical navigation images. 
On-board optical data were essential for determining and controlling two spacecraft position 
coordinates perpendicular to the line of sight to the asteroid, but could provide little information in the 
direction along the spacecraft’s flight path relative to  Gaspra.  The combination of radio metric data 
(Doppler and, when available, range) and the improved ground-based ephemeris for Gaspra provided 
information in this third, “time-of-flight” direction.  The quantities estimated in the orbit determination 
process include those mentioned previously, as well as  the Gaspra ephemeris, camera pointing parameters, 
and stochastic accelerations included to model miscellaneous spacecraft attitude updating events. 
Five TCMs were employed during the flight between the Earth and Gaspra – three to correct flight path 
errors resulting from the Earth flyby and create a flight path that would pass by both Gaspra and the Earth, 
while satisfying certain mission constraints, and two to home in on the desired Gaspra aimpoint.
40  It is 
estimated that the spacecraft passed 6 km from its B-plane aimpoint an d arrived 1.5 s early. 41  A planned 
science pointing update was not needed because of the proximity of the final orbit solution to the Gaspra 
aimpoint.45 
Earth-2 Flyby.  The Galileo spacecraft flew past Earth for a second time on 8 December 1992, at 303-
km altitude.  Between the Gaspra flyby and the second  Earth flyby, four trajectory correction maneuvers 
were executed.  The first was deterministic, and the first two had biased aimpoints to minimize the 
likelihood of entering the Earth’s atmosphere.  As on the approach to the first Earth flyby, S-band Doppler, 
range, and ΔDOR data were processed.  The most accurate orbit determination solutions made use of all 
three available radio metric data types.  During th is mission phase and throughout the remainder of the 
mission, the various navigational advantages associated with X-band communication links could not be 
realized, because of the high-gain antenna deployment problem. 
The spacecraft passed the Earth about 1.4 km from the B-plane aimpoint for the final TCM, adding 3.7 
km/s to the spacecraft’s heliocentric speed.
41,46  This accuracy was sufficient that a TCM scheduled for two 
weeks after the flyby, to correct an y errors in the outbound trajectory, was cancelled.  Both the first and 
second Earth flybys provided opportunities for the experimental processing of range data weighted near 
their actual precision,47 as would be done later in an operational fashion in the Mars Pathfinder mission. 
Ida Flyby.  The spacecraft flew past the main-belt asteroid 243 Ida on 28  August 1993, at distance of 
2,391 km.  As on approach to Gaspra, numerous ground-based observations of Ida were acquired during the 
several years before the flyby.  This observational campaign improved the Ida ephemeris by roughly a 
factor of four.48 
Again, the single-frame mosaic technique was used to generate optical navigation data.  Five optical 
navigation images were planned.  Only two and a fraction were returned, however, due to spacecraft safing 
events and the preemption of the DSN’s 70-m ante nna subnet by the Mars Observer project when 
communication with the latter spacecraft was lost.  Each image contained at least five usable data points. 
The spacecraft was too far from the Earth for the last several months before encounter to allow S-band 
ranging with a low-gain antenna.  Only a few ΔDOR points were available, and they were somewhat 
inconsistent with other tracking data.  Nevertheless, good orbit determination solutions were obtained; and 
the last of the three Ida targeting TCMs was cancelled as unnecessary.  The flyby took place less than 6 km 
from the desired B-plane aimpoint.  The time of closest approach was off by about 5 s.41 
Atmospheric Probe Delivery.   A deterministic TCM was needed after the Ida flyby to return the 
spacecraft to a flight path toward Jupiter.  A TCM performed on 12 April 1995 was used to place the 
combined orbiter/probe spacecraft on  the proper trajectory for atmosphe ric probe entry.  A subsequent 
scheduled TCM for further refinement of the flight path proved to be unnecessary.  To prepare for release, 
the combined vehicle was oriented in the desired probe release attitude and spun up to 10.5 rpm.  The probe 
was ejected using pre-loaded springs on 13 July 1995.  The probe had no means of propulsion, so that its 
flight path was established by the pre-release and release events.  The ΔV uncertainties in the pre-release 
spinup and the release event, as well as Jupiter ephe meris uncertainties, were the dominant error sources 
affecting the probe’s flight path.
41 
 12

PDF page 13
On 7 December the probe entered the top of Jupiter’ s atmosphere at a speed of 47.6 km/s.  It was 
required that the probe’s atmosphere-r elative flight path angle at entry (defined to occur at 450 km above 
the 1-bar pressure level) be -8.6±1.4 deg, with 99% probability. 41,49  The actual flight path angle error at 
entry was 0.15 deg.  Reconstruction of the entry flight path angle was also important.  The achieved 
accuracy of 0.10 deg compares w ith the requirement of 0.15 deg. 41  The probe slowed by aerodynamic 
braking for two minutes, then deployed its parachute and released its heat shield.  The probe transmitted 
data for nearly an hour as it parachuted down through Jupiter’s atmosphere.  The probe could not 
communicate with (or be tracked in a conventional fashion from) the Earth directly.  Data were transmitted 
to Earth using the Galileo orbiter spacecraft as a relay. 
Io Flyby and Jupiter Orbit Insertion.  The Galileo orbiter, deflected away from the probe’s trajectory by 
a 61-m/s maneuver on 27 July, also arrived at Jupiter on 7 December 1995.  On ap proach to Jupiter, the 
Galileo orbiter flew close to the satellite Io and used Io’s gravitational field to reduce the propulsive ΔV 
needed to insert into orbit about Jupiter.  Two months before arrival at Jupiter, the tape recorder on board 
the spacecraft had begun to behave in an anomalous ma nner.  This resulted in the cancellation of optical 
navigation images of Io and the removal of science re quirements related to navigational accuracy at Io.  A 
TCM had been performed on 29 August to clean up errors in the orbiter deflection maneuver.  Two later 
TCMs were cancelled as a consequence of the tape recorder anomaly and the cancellation of Io remote 
sensing observations.
50  The achievement of the desired gravity assist from Io depended principally on the 
flyby altitude, and the B-plane errors in this directio n were too small to warrant executing these TCMs.  
Later orbit determination solutions predicted a lower than planned flyby altitude at Io, but this allowed the 
orbital tour to begin with a Ganymede encounter one Ganymede revolution earlier than planned.  Since the 
latter outcome was quite satisfactory, the final pre-Io TCM and an update to the Jupiter Orbit Insertion 
(JOI) maneuver were cancelled.
50  The spacecraft passed about 67 km  from the expected Io B-plane 
location.41 
The JOI burn was executed after J upiter closest approach under acceler ometer control, such that the 
burn was lengthened slightly to compensate for a slight underperformance in thrust.  This 644-m/s burn was 
accurate enough that two planned subsequent orbit trim maneuvers (OTMs) were cancelled.50 
Galilean Satellite Tour.  A 378-m/s perijove-raise maneuver was executed on 14 March 1996 to target 
for the first encounter of the Galilean satellite tour, with Ganymede on 27 June 1996.  Subsequent 
encounters with Ganymede during the prime mission took place on 6 September 1996, 5 April 1997, and 7 
May 1997.  Prime mission Callisto encounters occurr ed on 4 November 1996, 25 June 1997, and 17 
September 1997.  Prime mission Europa encounters occurred on 19 December 1996, 20 February 1997, and 
6 November 1997.  Satellite gravity assists were used throughout the tour to enable subsequent satellite 
encounters. 
There were typically three OTMs scheduled per orbit about Jupiter: one three days before encounter to 
fine tune the satellite-relative aimpoint, one three days after encounter to correct for satellite flyby 
dispersions, and a third near apoapsis.  The satellite tour was frequently reoptimized, taking into account 
any accumulated flight path dispersions arising from orbit determination uncertainties, uncertainties in the 
ephemerides and masses of the Galilean satellites, and ma neuver execution errors, in order to select the 
aimpoint for the next encounter and minimize propellant expenditure.  Five of the first eight pre-encounter 
OTMs were cancelled as unnecessary.
51 
During the satellite tour, one-way, rather than two-way, Doppler data were frequently collected to boost 
the power of the spacecraft’s telemetry signal for scien ce data return.  One-way Doppler biases, drifts, and 
drift rates were estimated, based on two-way c overage before and after each one-way data span. 51  Loose 
pointing requirements for the low-gain antenna and th e spin-stabilized design of the spacecraft led to 
relatively few nongravitational forces due to attitude control activities to be dealt with in orbit 
determination. 
Optical navigation images were generated using a new flight software algorithm that detected and 
extracted from an imaging frame only the limb and terminator regions of the observed satellite and a small 
box of data around each star.
44  The amount of extracted data returned to Earth was about 1/300 of the data 
in a full imaging frame, a degree of data compression that was ve ry helpful for a spacecraft with limited 
 13

PDF page 14
data storage and transmission capabilities.  More than 100 optical navigation images were returned through 
the sixth satellite encounter on 5 April 1997.  Optical navigation images were not utilized thereafter 
because of the improvement in satellite ephemerides that had already been ac hieved, allowing for a 
simplification of the sequence design process. 
The ephemeris accuracies of the Galilean satellites impr oved by an order of ma gnitude with the orbit 
determination data collected during the prime tour encounters.  The satellite encounter delivery errors in the 
B-plane were typically 10-20 km for these encounters.41,52 
Subsequent to the prime satellite tour, a two-year Galileo Europa Mission (GEM) was initiated in 
December 1997, including fo urteen more orbits about Jupiter.  The spacecraft investigations focused 
particularly on Europa and Io.53 
Operational orbit determination solutions for the Galileo mission were generated using the Earth Mean 
Equator and Equinox of 1950 coordinate system, which had been used in many previous planetary 
missions.  During the GEM, a reconstruction of the sp acecraft trajectory through out the prime tour was 
undertaken in the newer J2000 International Celestial Reference Frame,54 together with the development of 
a consistent set of ephemerides for the Galilean sa tellites.  By necessity, th e work also included the 
improvement of the Jupiter ephemeris, the values of the Jovian system gravitational parameters, and the 
Jupiter pole orientation angles.55 
Ulysses 
The European Space Agency/NASA Ulysses spacecra ft, launched on 6 October 1990 by the Space 
Shuttle Discovery plus a Centaur upper stage, flew pa st Jupiter on 8 February 1992.  It used Jupiter's 
gravity to place it in a high-inclinatio n orbit about the sun, allowing obse rvation of the sun's polar regions 
in 1994 and 1995 and se veral times thereafter. 56  The requirements on navigational accuracy were less 
demanding (1000-km circular error in the Jupiter B-plane and one hour in time of arrival) than in many 
missions.  The spinning motion of the spacecraft (nomin ally 5 rpm), coupled with a circularly polarized 
antenna (nominally Earth-pointed), produced a bias in the Doppler data.  Communications were normally at 
S-band for the uplink and X-band for the downlink, although an S-band downlink was available also. 
Estimated parameters typically included spacecraft po sition and velocity at an epoch time, Doppler and 
range biases, velocity changes associated with attitude change maneuvers, and (stochastically modeled) 
solar radiation pressure parameters.
57  As the spacecraft came closer to Jupiter, ephemerides for Jupiter and 
the Earth and Jupiter’s mass were added to the list of  estimated parameters.  Th ree TCMs were performed 
en route to Jupiter.  The Ulysses flyby of Jupiter improved the accur acy of the Jupiter ephemeris, for 
subsequent use by the Galileo project. 
Tracking data acquired during a solar-conjunction period in 1991 provided a means of testing a model 
of solar plasma-induced variations in ranging data needed to allow the weighting of these data near their 
inherent precision,28,58 as would be done later in an operational fashion in the Mars Pathfinder mission. 
Cassini 
The Cassini spacecraft was launched on 15 October 1997 .  Because it could not be launched directly to 
Saturn with the propulsion systems available at the time, it followed a path described as a VVEJGA 
(Venus-Venus-Earth-Jupiter Gravity Assist) trajectory.  The primary telecommunication frequency was X-
band, with the NASA Deep Space Transponder being put to its first operational use.  Downlink capabilities 
were available at S-band and Ka-band also. 
Venus-1 Flyby.  The Cassini spacecraft flew past Venus on 26 April 1998 at an altitude of 284 km.  
Only the first two of three planned TCMs on appro ach to Venus were actually needed and executed. 59  
Even though only two TCMs were executed on the Ea rth-Venus trajectory segment, a total of 22 velocity 
change events, most associated with some facet of attitude control, were modeled and estimated as part of 
the orbit determination process.  In addition to thes e 22 discrete velocity change events, a number of 
continuously acting nongravitational acceleration ef fects were estimated.  Solar radiation pressure, 
asymmetric radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) radiation, and spacecraft outgassing effects were 
estimated over the entire data span.  Several shor t-duration nongravitational acceleration effects were 
 14

PDF page 15
estimated also.  Since the heliocentric  distance was nearly constant along portions of the trajectory, it was 
difficult to separate accelerations due to solar radiation pressure from those due to RTG thermal radiation.60 
For some period of time, orbit determination solutions drifted toward the Venus impact radius as more 
data were collected and processed.  The drifts in th e orbit determination solutions were large compared to 
the error statistics associated with those solutions – an indication of mismodeling, coupled with relatively 
tight weighting of the X-band tracking data and a spacecraft declination close to zero.1  It was deduced that 
uncoupled spacecraft thrusters were producing greater than expected ve locity changes along the sun line 
while performing pitch and yaw attitude control activities, and the spacecraft torque model was adjusted to 
compensate.  With evidence in hand of a high sensitivity of orbit solutions to mismodeling effects, the 
weighting of the Doppler and ranging data was diminished (from 0.2 to 1.0 mm/s and 5 to 50 m) to reduce 
the sensitivity.  The Venus periapsis distance predicted from orbit determination solutions a month before 
arrival was accurate to within 1 km,
60 although the B-plane close approach distance was 67 km less than 
originally planned.59 
Venus-2 and Earth Flybys.   Five TCMs were scheduled for the time between the spacecraft’s first and 
second Venus flybys.  The first of these, scheduled for shortly after the first flyby to clean up orbit errors 
magnified by the flyby, was cancelled due  to a post-flyby trajectory redesign.
59  A large deep space 
maneuver (DSM) was executed on 3 December 1998, to lower the periapsis distance and increase the flight 
path angle at the second Venus flyby.  A subseque nt TCM was executed to co rrect DSM execution errors, 
primarily in pointing. 61  A subsequent TCM removed a deliberate bias in the Venus aim plane.  A final 
TCM on approach to Venus was cance lled as unnecessary.  The spacecraft passed 11 km from the desired 
B-plane aimpoint on 24 June 1999, with a time of flight error of 2.5 s.62 
Four TCMs were performed between the second Venus flyby and the Earth flyby (18 August 1999), to 
gradually remove aim point biases (incorporated to keep the probability of Earth impact less than 10 -6) and 
target for the Earth flyby.  The spacecraft passed 9 km  from the desired B-plane aimpoint at Earth, with a 
time of flight error of less than 1 s.62 
For the Venus-1 to Earth flyby trajectory segment, the eight TCMs were modeled as finite burns and 
estimated as part of the orbit determination process.  In addition, 47 other ΔV events, associated with some 
sort of spacecraft activity, typically some facet of attitude control, were modele d as impulsive velocity 
changes and estimated.  As during the launch to Venus-1 mission phase, solar radiation pressure and 
asymmetric RTG radiation effects were estimated as continuously ac ting nongravitational accelerations.  
Several short-duration nongravitational acceleration effects were estimated also.  Ephemerides for the Earth 
and Venus were estimated.  Tracking station locations and media calibration effects were considered. 
The continuation of the Cassini mission to Jupiter and Saturn lies beyond the time period covered by 
this paper. 
EXPLORATION OF ASTEROIDS AND COMETS 
Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous 
The Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft was launched on 17 February 1996.  The first 
encounter in this mission was with the main-belt asteroid 253 Mathilde.  A series of five TCMs to correct 
upper-stage injection errors, calibrate the thrusters,
63 and target for Mathilde was used to fly past this 
asteroid on 27 June 1997. 
Mathilde Flyby.   Communications in the NEAR mission were at X-band.  Radio metric orbit 
determination on the way to Mathilde was complicated by passages through solar conjunction (15 to 23 
February 1997) and zero declination (22 April 1997) on approach.  Radio metric data were unusable for 
about a month around conjunction, due to solar corona effects.  When processing radio metric data outside 
of this time interval, it was found that the use of  ranging data improved orbit determination accuracy 
significantly relative to the processing of Doppler data alone.  It was also found that the tight weighting of 
ranging data, in combination with the estimation of add itional parameters to allow this tight weighting, did 
not improve orbit determination accuracy substantially.
64 
 15

PDF page 16
The inclusion of ranging data helped to compensate for the long outage of Doppler data around solar 
conjunction, aided in the estimation of solar radiation pressure coefficients, and aided in the determination 
of spacecraft declination when it was near zero.  Rang e data were not available at all times because the 
spacecraft’s high-gain antenna was need ed for ranging; and the pointing of the high-gain antenna toward 
Earth for extended periods of time would cause unacceptable angular momentum accumulations, due to the 
solar radiation pressure torque.64 
Numerous ground-based observations of Mathilde were made at observatories around the world during 
the asteroid’s 1995 and 1996 oppositions, in order to refine its ephemeris.  Some observations made in May 
and June 1997 were reduced relative to the Hippar cos and Tycho star catalogs and were particularly 
accurate.64,65 
Optical data derived from the on-board Multi-Spectral Imager (MSI) were available only during the last 
two days before arrival at Mathilde.  The solar phase angle of 140 deg on approach made the asteroid 
difficult to detect very far in advance.  Optical na vigation images were acquired in batches of 16 at six 
separate times.  Pointing the MSI at Mathilde required pointing the solar arrays 50 deg away from the sun 
line, which was undesirable and could be permitted only infrequently.  Pointing the MSI only 40 deg from 
the sun introduced stray light into the optical navigation images, making dim background stars difficult to 
detect.  In addition, the high phase  angle displaced the center of bri ghtness of Mathilde from its center of 
mass.  Mathilde became visible during  the second optical navigation op portunity, but only when several 
imaging frames were added together.  It became visible in individual frames only in the fifth opportunity.
64 
The accurate modeling of any periods of off-nomina l spacecraft attitude was found to be important in 
obtaining accurate orbit solutions.  Estimated constant  parameters in the orbit determination solutions on 
approach to Mathilde included the epoch state of the spacecraft, a scale factor applied to the solar radiation 
pressure model, the magnitude and direction of the fifth TCM, the coordinates of the DSN tracking stations, 
and the ephemeris and mass of Mathilde.  Estimated stochastic parameters were associated with the Earth’s 
orientation, tropospheric and ionospheric signal delays, range biases, and camera pointing biases.  Doppler 
and range data were weighted at 0.1 mm/s and 1 m, respectively.64 
A TCM planned for 13 hours before the flyby was cancelled as unnecessary, based on the latest solution 
for the spacecraft’s orbit (based primarily on radio me tric data, along with a limited amount of optical 
navigation data) and the asteroid’s ephemeris determined largely from the ground-based observations.  A 
late update to the spacecraft pointing at closest approach to Mathilde was made based on similar 
information, with additional optical navigation data included.  The spacecraft flew past Mathilde at a 
distance of 1212 km and a speed of 9.9 km/s.  The relative position uncertainties in the B-plane were less 
than 10 km at the time of the final encounter sequence update, with the time of flight uncertainty less than 5 
s.  The mass of Mathilde was determined from pre-an d-post encounter tracking to an accuracy of several 
percent.64,65 
Earth Flyby.  On 3 and 23 July 1997, the spacecraft executed  a 274-m/s deep space maneuver in two 
parts (98%/2%), lowering the perihelion distance from 0.99 AU to 0.95 AU and setting up an Earth gravity 
assist swingby on 23 January 1998.  Two TCMs after the double maneuver were used to correct maneuver 
execution errors and target the Eart h flyby, which occurred at a clos est approach distance of 539 km, 
altering the orbital inclination from 0.5 to 10.2 deg and the aphelion distance from 2.17 to 1.77 AU, nearly 
matching the corresponding values (as well as the line of apsides) for the near Earth asteroid 433 Eros.
66 
Eros Flyby.  Two TCMs preceded an effort  to initiate a rendezvous with  Eros on 20 December 1998, 
which was aborted shortly after starting due to an  on-board software problem.  Instead, the NEAR 
spacecraft flew by Eros on 23 December 1998 at a speed of 0.965 km/s and a distance of 3828 km.66 
A 932-m/s anomaly-recovery maneuver was performed on 3 January 1999, to roughly match the 
spacecraft's orbital speed to that of Eros.  Two corrective TCMs we re performed over a number of 
months.66  A successful rendezvous with Eros was achieved beyond the time period covered by this paper. 
Deep Space 1 
Technology Demonstrations.  The Deep Space 1 (DS1) spacecraft wa s launched on 24 October 1998 to 
demonstrate a variety of new technologies.  Propulsion was provided by a xenon ion engine.  Xenon ions 
 16

PDF page 17
were accelerated and ejected from the spacecraft as an ion beam, producing 0.09 N of thrust at maximum 
power (2300 W) and 0.02 N at the minimum operational power of 500 W.  Whereas deep-space trajectories 
in missions with chemical propulsion are characterized by long periods of coasting, with only brief periods 
of thrusting, electric propulsion missions involve thrusting a substantial fraction of the time, with the 
engines shut off when thrusting is least advantageous. 
One of the technologies demonstrated by the DS1 mission was AutoNav, the first autonomous 
navigation system to be used in deep space.  AutoNav consisted of an executive, which interacted with the 
rest of the flight software and was responsible for scheduling and executing events; a real-time ephemeris 
server, which provided spacecraft and natural body ephemeris inform ation to other flight software 
elements; and the computational elements that performed the fundamental navigational calculations related 
to orbit determination, maneuver planning, and encounter target tracking.
67,68 
Another experiment on board th e DS1 spacecraft was the Miniature Integrated Camera and 
Spectrometer (MICAS).  The two visible light channels were potentially usable for optical navigation – one 
with a CCD chip and one with an active pixel sensor (APS) array. 
Cruise and Approach Autonomous Navigation.   Orbit determination during cruise was done 
autonomously by imaging “beacon” asteroids, one at a time, relative to star backgrounds.  Each such 
measurement gave a two-dimensi onal position fix for the spacecraft, to some level of accuracy.  
Subsequent measurements in different directions provided different two-dimensional position fixes.  
Several clusters of such sightings were incorporated into a least-squares filter to obtain an orbit 
determination solution.  The accuracy  of such solutions depended on th e brightnesses of, distances to, and 
angular separations among the asteroids; the accuracies of the asteroid ephemeride s; the resolution of the 
camera; the ability to pinpoint asteroid locations in camera frames; and the accuracy of the camera pointing 
information.  A list of beacon asteroids to observe during a given mission segment was stored on board the 
spacecraft, along with ephemerides for all of the beacons.  At predetermined times, the spacecraft trajectory 
was compared to the ephemeris of a particular asteroid to generate a camera pointing direction.68 
Coarse registration of the asteroid and background stars in each imaging frame was done by computing 
a center of brightness in a 50-100 pixel region surrounding each star, based on the knowledge of the inertial 
pointing direction provided by the attitude control subsystem star tracker.  The predicted locations for the 
stars were shifted by the measured center-of-brightness/predicted location offsets, one star at a time, until 
the light intensity integrated over the specified regions surrounding the stars was maximized.  Fine 
registration of the asteroid and background stars was done using a variation of the single-frame mosaic 
technique employed during the Galileo mission on ap proach to Gaspra and Ida.  The spacecraft attitude 
wandered somewhat during the exposure time, creating complex, unpredictable image tracks.  The image of 
each object in a frame could be used as a template to cross-correlate with ot her image tracks.  This 
information was combined in a least-squares sense to find an ensemble of image shifts where the signals 
had peak responses with respect to each other.  The accuracy with which the pointing estimates provided by 
the attitude control subsystem could be updated was dependent on the number of stars present in the 
imaging frame, with single-star frames providing little information regarding rotations about the boresight 
direction.
68 
The on-board dynamical model of the spacecraft included gravitational attractions of the major bodies 
of the solar system, solar radiation pressure, thrust forces due to the ion propulsion system or the hydrazine 
attitude control thrusters, and a th ree-dimensional bias acceleration to account for small unmodeled forces.  
The propagation of the spacecraft motion was done in a heliocentric, Earth Mean Equator of 2000 
coordinate system using a 7-8 th order Runge-Kutta numerical integrator.  Orbit determination solutions 
were carried out by linearizing about a nominal traject ory and estimating corrections to parameters that 
minimized the data residuals in a weighted least-squares sense.  A U-D covariance factorization was used.68 
Observations of beacon asteroids we re typically carried out during 4- 6 hr time blocks once per week.  
After all of the imaging frames ha d been recorded and processed, a new orbit determination solution was 
generated, based on data going back about 30 days in  the past, with the solution mapped from the epoch 
time to the current time and propagated into the future.68 
 17

PDF page 18
The testing of the autonomous navigation system was delayed for several months due to the need to 
compensate for some unanticipated attributes of th e experimental MICAS camera.  There was significant 
stray light apparent in the images, which could be compensated for by the differencing of sets of frames.  
There were geometric distortions in the images, which required modeling.  The ability to detect dim objects 
was less than expected, with the result that the dimmer beacon asteroids and background stars were not 
usable.  Independent of this, the estimates of attitude co ntrol thruster firings were off by a factor of two, 
which corrupted the orbit determination solutions, until corrected; and an erroneous parameter describing 
the orientation of the camera boresight was sent to the spacecraft. 
The on-board orbit determination accuracy varied over a broad range, eventually settling down to 700-
1000 km, after the various problems noted above had been addressed.  The velocity errors similarly varied 
over a broad range, settling down to 0.2-0.5 m/s.  After the upload of a corrected parameter file in mid-June 
1999, orbit determination on board the spacecraft was operating fairly independently of the ground.  The 
accuracy being obtained was not sufficient to fully support autonomous  maneuver planning, however, even 
though the algorithms worked well when supplied with sufficiently accurate information.
68 
Maneuver planning was accomplished by means of a linear control process.  The initial design of the 
nominal trajectory using ion propulsion was done on the ground.  Partial derivatives of the target conditions 
with respect to the availabl e thrust-related control parameters were calculated on board.  Modifications to 
the control parameters were determined by inverting the partial derivative matrix and multiplying by the 
desired change in target conditions. 
The first natural body to be encountered was the near-Earth asteroid 9969 Braille, to be flown past on 
29 July 1999, at 15.5 km/s relative velocity.  Braille was first detected by the ground processing of multiple 
images three days before encounter, about 450 km from its expected position.  A TCM, based on ground 
computations, was executed taking this information into account 1.5 days before encounter.  After the on-
board software had locked onto Braille, a latent defect in the software caused a spacecraft safing event, 
destroying the latest trajectory result.  The processing of more imaging frames on the ground refined the 
orbit solution relative to Braille and precipitated a TC M six hours before encounter to avoid a possible 
impact.  Later images processed on board confirmed the post-TCM trajectory estimate.68 
Encounter Autonomous Navigation.  As the spacecraft drew close to the asteroid encounter, a different 
approach to generating orbit determination solutions was adopted.  At this point, no more thrusting 
maneuvers were to be performed; and the objective was to maintain visual lock on the asteroid.  The rapid 
processing of images for this purpose could not be accomplished by the orbit determination process that has 
been described so far.  Instead, a reduced-state es timator was used, modeling the trajectory as a target-
centered straight line through encounter, with initial conditions 27 minutes prior to encounter provided by 
the full orbit determination process.  In addition, th e APS array was used rather than the CCD; the image 
processing consisted solely of finding a brightness centroid; and, since no stars were visible, pointing 
information was provided solely by the star tracker.
68 
The asteroid was not tracked  successfully during the encounter.  It was determined after the fact that a 
spurious signal had appeared above the detection threshold level before Braille itself exceeded that level, 
causing the on-board orbit solution to shift by 30 km.  The asteroid turned out to be considerably dimmer 
than expected, and the sensitivity of the APS was le ss than expected.  The aste roid was captured in CCD 
images recorded 15 minutes after closest approach, after the calculation of pointing commands had reverted 
to the pre-encounter process.68 
The autonomous navigation system worked well in cruise after the Braille encounter, until the star 
tracker failed in November 1999.  It also worked well in an encounter with comet 19P/Borrelly, beyond the 
time frame covered by this paper. 
CONCLUSION 
Deep space navigation capabilities, which had evolved enormously from the ear ly Mariner missions of 
the 1960s and early 1970s to the Voyager mission of the late 1970s and 1980s, continued to evolve through 
the 1990s, benefiting the dozen planetary missions that  have been described.  The availability of X-band 
communications on both the uplink and downlink, coupled with the improved calibrations of various error 
 18

PDF page 19
 19
REFERENCES 
 
sources, improved the accuracy of Do ppler and ranging data significan tly.  Optical navigation capabilities 
improved with the use of charge-coupled device photodetectors and the development of more sophisticated 
image processing techniques. 
Rapid increases in computing power allowed more accurate orbit determination by permitting the 
estimation of many additional parameters associated with dynamical and measurement modeling.  The 
combination of increasing computational capabilities and declining costs allowed more comprehensive 
navigational analyses to be carried out.  Orbit determination and maneuver planning functions were 
performed on board a planetary spacecraft for the first time. 
The use of aerobraking to reduce a long-period ellipti cal orbit about an atmosphere-bearing planet to a 
low-altitude, near-circular orbit was demonstrated, allowing  a large saving in propellant usage.  The use of 
a continuous, low level of thrust, provided by an ion propulsion system, was demonstrated as an efficient 
means of travel through the inner solar system.  Atmospheric entry, descent, and landing techniques were 
improved in accuracy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research described in this paper was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California 
Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
1. L. J. Wood, “The Evolution of Deep Space Navigation: 1962-1989,” Paper 08-051, 31st Annual AAS 
Guidance and Control Conference, Breckenridge, CO, Feb. 2008. 
2. M. S. Ryne, et al., “Navigation of Pioneer 12 During Atmospheric Reentry at Venus,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Sciences: Astrodynamics 1993, Vol. 85, Pt. II, ed. A. Misra, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, 
pp. 1699-1716. 
3. D. J. Mudgway, Uplink-Downlink: A History of the Deep Space Network 1957-1997 , NASA SP-2001-4227, 
2001. 
4. E. J. Graat, et al., “Contribution of Doppler and Interferometric Tracking During the Magellan Approach to 
Venus,” Advances in the Astronautical Sciences: Astrodynamics 1991, Vol. 76, Pt. II, ed. B. Kaufman, et al., 
Univelt, San Diego, 1992, pp. 919-939. 
5. M. S. Ryne, “Differenced Doppler Tracking in Interplanetary Navigation: The Magellan Cruise 
Reconstruction,” AIAA Paper 92- 4520, AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, Hilton Head, SC, Aug. 
1992. 
6. C. M. Diarra, “Magellan Propulsive Maneuver s Analysis,” AAS Paper 91-179, AAS/AIAA Spaceflight 
Mechanics Meeting, Houston, TX, Feb. 1991. 
7. D. B. Engelhardt, et al., “Determina tion and Prediction of Magellan's Orbit,” Advances in the Astronautical 
Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1991, Vol. 75, Pt. II, ed. J. K. Soldner, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1991, pp. 
1143-1160. 
8. J. D. Giorgini, et al., “Mag ellan Navigation Using X-Band Differenced Doppler During Venus Mapping 
Phase,” Proceedings of the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference , Hilton Head, SC, Aug. 1992, pp. 351-
360. 
9. D. B. Engelhardt, et al., “Interleaving Magellan Altimetry Data Acquisition Between Mapping Cycles 1 and 
2,” Advances in the Astronautical  Sciences: Astrodynamics 1991 , Vol. 76, Pt. II, ed. B. Kaufman, et al., 
Univelt, San Diego, 1992, pp. 863-874. 
10. P. W. Chodas, et al., “High Precision Magellan Orbit Determination for Stereo Image Processing,” 
Advances in the Astronautical  Sciences: Astrodynamics 1993 , Vol. 85, Pt. I, ed. A. Misra, et al., Univelt, 
San Diego, 1994, pp. 279-296. 

PDF page 20
 20
 
 
11. S. K. Wong, et al., “Naviga ting through the Venus Atmosphere,” Advances in the Astronautical Sciences: 
Spaceflight Mechanics 1994, Vol. 87, Pt. II, ed. J. E. Cochran, Jr.,  et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, pp. 633-
645. 
12. D. T. Lyons, “Aerobraking Ma gellan: Plan Versus Reality,” Advances in the As tronautical Sciences: 
Spaceflight Mechanics 1994, Vol. 87, Pt. II, ed. J. E. Cochran, Jr.,  et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, pp. 663-
680. 
13. W. H. Willcockson, “Magellan Aerobraking Control Corridor – Design and Implementation,” Advances in 
the Astronautical Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1994, Vol. 87, Pt. II, ed. J. E. Cochran, Jr., et al., Univelt, 
San Diego, 1994, pp. 647-662. 
14. D. T. Lyons, et al., “Beyond Aerobraking: Designing the Magell an Global Gravity Experiment,” Advances 
in the Astronautical Scie nces: Astrodynamics 1993, Vol. 85, Pt. II, ed. A. Misra, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 
1994, pp. 1471-1484. 
15. P. B. Esposito, et al., “Navigating Mars Observer : Launch through Encounter and Response to Spacecraft’s 
Pre-Encounter Anomaly,” Advances in the Astronautical Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1994, Vol. 87, Pt. 
II, ed. J. E. Cochran, Jr., et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, pp. 681-694. 
16. L. A. Cangahuala, et al.,  “Mars Observer Interplanetary Cruise Orbit Determination,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1994 , Vol. 87, Pt. II, ed. J. E. Cochran, Jr., et al., Univelt, 
San Diego, 1994, pp. 1049-1068. 
17. D. T. Lyons, et al., “Mars Global Surveyor: Aerobraking Mission Overview,” Journal of Spacecraft and 
Rockets, Vol. 36, May-June 1999, pp. 307-313. 
18. D. T. Lyons, “Mars Global Survey or: Aerobraking with a Broken Wing,” Advances in th e Astronautical 
Sciences: Astrodynamics 1997, Vol. 97, Pt. I, ed. F. R. Hoots, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1998, pp. 275-294. 
19. M. D. Johnston, et al., “Mars Global Surveyor  Aerobraking at Mars,” Advances in the Astronautical 
Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1998 , Vol. 99, Pt. I, ed. J. W. Middour, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1998, 
pp. 205-223. 
20. P. Esposito, et al., “Mars Global Surveyor Naviga tion and Aerobraking at Ma rs,” AAS Paper 98-384, 13th 
International Symposium on Space Flight Dynamics, Greenbelt, MD, May 1998. 
21. M. D. Johnston, et al., “The Strategy for the Second Phase of Aerobraking Mars Global Surveyor,” 
Advances in the Astronautical  Sciences: Astrodynamics 1999 , Vol. 103, Pt. I, ed. K. C. Howell, et al., 
Univelt, San Diego, 2000, pp. 53-68. 
22. P. B. Esposito, et al., “Naviga ting Mars Global Surveyor Through the Martian Atmosphere: Aerobraking 2,” 
Advances in the Astronautical  Sciences: Astrodynamics 1999 , Vol. 103, Pt. III, ed. K. C. Howell, et al., 
Univelt, San Diego, 2000, pp. 2217-2236. 
23. R. H. Tolson, et al., “Applicatio n of Accelerometer Data to Mars Global Surveyor Aerobraking Operations,” 
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 36, May-June 1999, pp. 323-329. 
24. S. Demcak, et al., “Mars Global Su rveyor Mapping Orbit Determination,” Advances in the Astronautical 
Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 2001, Vol. 108, Pt. I, ed. L. A. D’Amario, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 2001, 
pp. 3-24. 
25. C. Uphoff, “Orbit Selection for a Mars Geos cience/Climatology Orbi ter,” Paper 84-0318, AIAA 22nd 
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, Jan. 1984. 
26. D. Smith, et al., “The Gravity Field of Mars: Results from Mars Global Surveyor,” Science, Vol. 286, 1 
October 1999, pp. 94-97. 
27. R. M. Vaughan, et al.,  “Navigation Flight Operations for Mars Pathfinder,” Journal of Spacecraft and 
Rockets, Vol. 36, May-June 1999, pp. 340-347. 
28. S. W. Thurman, T. P. McElrath , and V. M. Pollmeier, “Short-Arc Orbit Determination Using Coherent X-
Band Ranging Data,” Advances in the Astronautical Sc iences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1992 , Vol. 79, ed. R. 
Diehl, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1992, pp. 23-44. 

PDF page 21
 21
 
 
29. J. A. Estefan, V. M. Pollmeier , and S. W. Thurman, “Precision X-Band Doppler and Ranging Navigation for 
Current and Future Mars Exploration Missions,” Advances in the Astronautic al Sciences: Spaceflight 
Dynamics 1993, Vol. 84, ed. J. Teles and M. Samii, Univelt, San Diego, 1993, pp. 3-15. 
30. D. A. Spencer, et al., “Mars Pathfinder Entry, Descent, and Landing Reconstruction,” Journal of Spacecraft 
and Rockets, Vol. 36, May-June 1999, pp. 357-366. 
31. R. D. Braun, et al., “Mars Pathfinder Atmospheric Entry Navigation Operations,” Journal of Spacecraft and 
Rockets, Vol. 36, May-June 1999, pp. 348-356. 
32. P. H. Kallemeyn, Jr., et al., “Navigation and Guidance for the Mars Surveyor ’98 Mission,” Proceedings of 
the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, Boston, MA, Aug. 1998, pp. 471-481. 
33. Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Inves tigation Board Phase I Report , National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Washington, DC, Nov. 10, 1999. 
34. Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Investigation Board, Report on Project Management in NASA , National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, DC, Mar. 13, 2000. 
35. P. D. Burkhart, et al., “Mars Polar Lander Approach Navigation,” Advances in the As tronautical Sciences: 
Spaceflight Mechanics 2000, Vol. 105, Pt. II, ed. C. A. Kluever, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 2000, pp. 1539-
1557. 
36. W. H. Willcockson, “Mars Polar Lander Entry, Descent, and Landing Design,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Sciences: Astrodynamics 1999 , Vol. 103, Pt. I, ed. K. C. Howe ll, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 
2000, pp. 33-52. 
37. Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Summary Report , National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, Washington, DC, Mar. 14, 2000. 
38. L. A. D’Amario, et al., “G alileo 1989 VEEGA Trajectory Design,” The Journal of the Astronautical 
Sciences, Vol. 37, July-Sept. 1989, pp. 281-306. 
39. P. H. Kallemeyn, et al., “Galileo Orbit De termination for the Venus and Earth-1 Flybys,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Scienc es: Astrodynamics 1991 , Vol. 76, Pt. II, ed. B. Kaufma n, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 
1992, pp. 1013-1026. 
40. C. L. Potts and M. G. Wilson, “Maneuver Design for the Galileo VEEGA Trajectory,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Sciences: Astrodynamics 1993, Vol. 85, Pt. II, ed. A. Misra, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, 
pp. 1019-1047. 
41. L. A. D’Amario, “Navigation of the Galileo Spacecraft,” Proceedings of the Three Galileos Conference , 
Padua, Italy, Jan. 1997, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 115-143. 
42. P. H. Kallemeyn, et al., “Galileo Orbit Determination for the Gaspra Asteroid Encounter,” Proceedings of 
the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, Hilton Head, SC, Aug. 1992, pp. 370-380. 
43. D. K. Yeomans, et al ., “Targeting an Asteroid: The Galileo Spacecraft's Encounter with 951 Gaspra,” 
Astronomical Journal, Vol. 105, Apr. 1993, pp. 1547-1552, 1631. 
44. W. M. Owen, Jr., et al., “A Brief History of Optical Navigation at  JPL,” Paper 08-053, 31st Annual AAS 
Guidance and Control Conference, Breckenridge, CO, Feb. 2008. 
45. R. M. Vaughan, et al., “Optical Navi gation for the Galileo Gaspra Encounter,” Proceedings of the 
AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, Hilton Head, SC, Aug. 1992, pp. 361-369. 
46. S. Bhaskaran, et al., “Galileo Orb it Determination for the Earth-2 Encounter,” Advances in the Astronautical 
Sciences: Astrodynamics 1993, Vol. 85, Pt. I, ed. A. Misra, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, pp. 343-354. 
47. V. M. Pollmeier, P. H. Kallemeyn, and S. W. T hurman, “Application of Hi gh Precision Two-Way S-Band 
Ranging to the Navigation of the Galileo Earth Encounters,” Advances in the Astronautical Sciences: 
Spaceflight Dynamics 1993, Vol. 84, Pt. I, ed. J. Teles and M. Samii, Univelt, San Diego, 1993, pp. 17-29. 
48. P. G. Antreasian, et al., “Galileo Orbit Determination for the Ida Encounter,” Advances in the Astronautical 
Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1994 , Vol. 87, Pt. II, ed. J. E. Cochran, Jr., et al., Univelt, San Diego, 
1994, pp. 1027-1048. 

PDF page 22
 22
 
49. R. J. Haw, et al., “Navigating Galileo at Jupiter Arrival,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets , Vol. 34, July-
Aug. 1997, pp. 503-508. 
50. M. G. Wilson, et al., “Maneu ver Design for Galileo Jupiter Appro ach and Orbital Operations,” 12th 
International Symposium on Space Flight Dynamics, Darmstadt, Germany, June 1997. 
51. P. G. Antreasian, et al., “Galileo Orbit Determination Results During the Satellite Tour,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Scienc es: Astrodynamics 1997 , Vol. 97, Pt. II, ed. F. R. Hoots, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 
1998, pp. 1491-1535. 
52. R. J. Haw, et al., “Galileo Prime Mission Navigation,” Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 37, Jan.-Feb. 
2000, pp. 56-63. 
53. J. L. Bell and J. R.  Johannessen, “Galileo Europa  Mission (GEM) Tour Design,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Scienc es: Astrodynamics 1997 , Vol. 97, Pt. I, ed. F. R. Hoot s ,  e t  a l . ,  U n i velt, San Diego, 
1998, pp. 213-227. 
54. C. Ma, et al., “The International Celestial Reference Frame as Defined by Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry,” Astronomical Journal, Vol. 116, 1998, pp. 516-546. 
55. R. A. Jacobson, et al., “A Comprehensive Orbit Reconstruction for the Galileo Prime Mission in the J2000 
System,” The Journal of the Astronautical Sciences, Vol. 48, Oct.-Dec. 2000, pp. 495-516. 
56. T. McElrath, et al., “Uly sses Navigation at Jupiter Encoun ter,” AIAA Paper 92-4524, AIAA/AAS 
Astrodynamics Conference, Hilton Head, SC, Aug. 1992. 
57. H. J. Gordon, T. P. McElrath , and P. R. Menon, “Ulysses Navigatio n,” 3rd International Symposium on 
Spacecraft Flight Dynamics, Darmstadt, Germany, Sept.-Oct. 1991. 
58. T. P. McElrath, S. W. Thurman, and K. E. Criddle, “Navigation De monstrations of Precision Ranging with 
the Ulysses Spacecraft,” Advances in the Astronautical Sciences: Astrodynamics 1993, Vol. 85, Pt. II, ed. A. 
Misra, et al., Univelt, San Diego, 1994, pp. 1635-1650. 
59. T. D. Goodson, et al., “Ca ssini Maneuver Experience: Launch and Early Cruise,” AIAA Guidance, 
Navigation, and Control Conference, Boston, MA, Aug. 1998. 
60. D. C. Roth, et al., “Cassini Orbit Determ ination from Launch to the First Venus Flyby,” Proceedings of the 
AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Boston, MA, Aug. 1998, pp. 482-494. 
61. T. D. Goodson, et al., “Cassini Maneuver Experience:  Finishing Inner Cruise,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 2000, Vol. 105, Pt. II, ed. C. A. Kluever, et al., Univelt, San 
Diego, 2000, pp. 1031-1051. 
62. M. D. Guman, et al., “Cassi ni Orbit Determination from First Venus Flyby to Earth Flyby,” Advances in the 
Astronautical Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 2000, Vol. 105, Pt. II, ed. C. A. Kluever, et al., Univelt, San 
Diego, 2000, pp. 1053-1072. 
63. B. G. Williams, et al., “Navigation Results fo r NASA’s Near Earth Aste roid Rendezvous Mission,” 
Proceedings of the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Conference, San Diego, CA, July 1996, pp. 87-98. 
64. D. J. Scheeres, et al., “Missi on Design and Navigation of NEAR’s Encounter with Asteroid 253 Mathilde,” 
Advances in the Astr onautical Sciences: Spaceflight Mechanics 1998, Vol. 99, Pt. II, ed. J. W. Middour, et 
al., Univelt, San Diego, 1998, pp. 1157-1173. 
65. D. K. Yeomans, et al., “Est imating the Mass of Asteroid 253 Mathilde from Tracking Data During the 
NEAR Flyby,” Science, Vol. 278, 19 Dec. 1997, pp. 2106-2109. 
66. J. V. McAdams, et al., “Maneuver History for th e NEAR Mission: Launch through Eros Orbit Insertion,” 
Proceedings of the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Denver, CO, Aug. 2000, pp. 244-261. 
67. J. E. Riedel, et al., “Navigation for the Ne w Millennium: Autonomous Navigation for Deep Space 1,” 
Proceedings of the 12th International  Symposium on Space Flight Dynamics , Darmstadt, Germany, June 
1997, ESA SP-403, pp. 303-320. 
68. S. Bhaskaran, et al., “The Deep Space 1 Aut onomous Navigation System: A Post-Flight Analysis,” 
Proceedings of the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Denver, CO, Aug. 2000, pp. 42-52. 